so I know I said before that like spiral
galaxies are my favorite because they're
just so beautiful but of the weird stuff
it's gotta be the jellyfish so jellyfish
galaxies are this weird type of galaxies
that we often see in groups or clusters
of galaxies where they've had their gas
sort of stripped off in this really long
tail behind them so they end up looking
like jellyfish so a galaxy is kind of
like a city of stars our own galaxy is
the Milky Way it's got about a billion
stars in it and it's sort of like an
island of stars in space and everywhere
we look we see these other islands of
stars that we call galaxies sometimes
these galaxies are on their own in sort
of empty regions of space and sometimes
they're clustered together under their
own gravity in groups of like 5 10 20 or
sometimes huge clusters of hundreds of
galaxies and so we tend to only see the
jellyfish galaxies in these groups or
clusters we think because of the fact
that it's like environmental effect so
the closer into the center of a group of
cluster you get the higher the fraction
of non star-forming galaxies you get so
there must be some process by which when
galaxies fall into that cluster they
have their gas stripped or heated up or
expelled from the galaxy in some way so
that they don't have any fuel left for
star formation and there's lots of
different theories for how this can
happen lots of different like mechanisms
but one of them which gets sort of a lot
of press is called Ram pressure
stripping and it's this that we think is
responsible for the jellyfish galaxies
the stars don't get stripped by Ram
pressure stripping it's just the gas
because the stars are much heavier so
they're much more tightly bound by
gravity than the gas whereas the gas you
know is just a fluid of very small
particles and so it really easily gets
stripped because it's not very well held
by the gravity of the galaxies so the
pressure comes from the fact the galaxy
is experiencing this force by falling in
to this cluster region kind of like a
wind so the first time I had Ram
pressure stripping explain to me it was
during my PhD like lecture course and a
lecturer said that it is like riding a
bike so fast that all of your hair falls
out
I have been terrified to ride a bike
ever since and the reason that Ram
pressure stripping we think could be so
effective is because the gas in between
all the galaxies in that cluster is
incredibly incredibly hot because it
gives out x-rays and so we know that
something has to be incredibly energetic
for it to give out such energetic
radiation and the kind of x-rays that
this gas gives out is what we call
bremsstrahlung radiation which I hope is
pronounced right but I butchered German
words on this channel before so I'm not
sure but we're going with bremsstrahlung
and it effectively translates as
breaking radiation so what happens is
electrons are decelerated by going past
larger atoms so they fly past their path
is curved and their decelerated by the
sort of gravitational interaction
between the two things
the problem is if you decelerate an
electron then you reduce its energy and
so that energy has to go somewhere and
in this case it's given out as x-ray
radiation so the same way that in a car
you know you decelerate your car that
energy has to go somewhere from you
reducing your speed and in that case the
brakes
obviously heat up and you get kinetic
energy out of braking your car instead
of getting a shoe we get x-ray is out of
braking electrons but the reason we
think that gas is hot though I think is
really interesting so in a cluster of
galaxies you tend to have very massive
galaxies and the most massive galaxies
have the most massive supermassive black
holes at their center now if you feed
those supermassive black holes by
funneling gas down into the center of
the gravitational well there is that
cluster then they're gonna grow yes but
some of that material then it's sort of
gonna get to high pressure around the
black hole for it to actually accrete
all of that material and so some of it
gets thrown out in these huge radiation
Jets going at the speed of light away
from the black hole and it's those Jets
that we think hate the gas in between
all the galaxies in the group or the
cluster so if you're wondering what kind
of speed that these galaxies are
actually in falling on these clusters of
galaxies then well there was one of them
that was found
ESO one 37000 one fascinating name I
know but it was traveling at 4.5 million
miles an hour which is like 7.2 million
kilometres an hour through a customer
the normal cluster so I mean you can
kind of tell with that kind of speed
like no wonder like it has such an
effect on the stuff inside the galaxy so
that you get these huge jellyfish tails
the cool thing is though as well as
being stripped at the same time you have
all these other processes going on
caused by the shocks and also then the
pressure of it pushing the gas down and
so you do end up compressing some of the
gas in the sort of tentacles away from
the galaxy that actually end up forming
stars and so you can end up with these
star forming regions that sort of end up
peppering along those gas trails that
really do make it look like the galaxy
has got tentacles so these jellyfish
galaxies have been studied for a couple
of decades now trying to help us
understand this process of Ram pressure
stripping and whether it's responsible
for the fact that we see you know less
star forming things towards the center
of clusters despite the fact that these
jellyfish galaxies they're not very
common they're quite rare still so if
rampage is stripping is responsible for
all of the non star-forming galaxies you
see in clusters surely we should see
more jellyfish as well but we don't
there must be something else going on
here one of my favorite results though
was a group led by Moretti turtle in
2018 and they found one of these
jellyfish galaxies that was actually a
ring galaxy like hogs objects so some of
you might assume a previous video on
hogs object there's this really cool
galaxy that's like a hundred thousand
light-years across with a sort of spare
ID in the middle that's sort of
yellowish and sort of not forming any
stars and this bright blue ring of star
formation that's clearly separated out
from that central component but these
people have found something that looks
like this that is also a jellyfish
galaxy in falling on a cluster so
something that's incredibly rare already
to have one of these very precise rings
and then also to be a jellyfish so it's
like finding a needle in a needle stack
like they're incredibly rare what's
really cool though as you can see that
star formation has actually stopped in
one side of the ring where it's closest
to the center of the cluster and it's
been stripped away from that side and
it's still star forming in the other
side as the gas travels through it which
is really really cool one of the main
groups is led by Bianca Ponte and they
had a really cool paper back in 2017 so
about seven of these jellyfish galaxies
with a really cool instrument called
muse
now Muse is what we call an integral
field unit instrument so instead of
taking one single measurement of the
galaxy so in this case it would be a
single measurement of a spectra where
you take the light from the galaxy split
it through a prism and you get a sort of
trace of light and trace of elements in
the galaxy instead of one you take you
know a hundred arrayed in a mosaic so
you get this sort of like jigsaw puzzle
pieces of spectra of the galaxy and so
what that actually allows you to do is
get this sort of what we call a data
cube which you can either think as an
image of the galaxy at every single
wavelength or a spectra every single
pixel in the image it's really really
detailed and like the data that you get
from use is incredible like every time I
go to conferences everybody wants to go
to the muse talks and just like drool
over the data on the presentation four
people are showing because it's just so
so cool also I love the fact that they
then get to call their talks at these
conferences like really really clever
things like one of my favorite ones I
ever went to was called dissecting
jellyfish with Muse which just sounds
like a really fun science class with a
rock band to me which personally I would
love to do you know like if Matt Bellamy
ever wants to dissect a jellyfish I am
there but what pe'ahi aunty and her
collaborators found is that of these
seven jellyfish galaxies they looked at
the ones with like the longest tails and
the most effect from Ram pressure
stripping actually had these growing
supermassive black holes in the center
these things that we call active
galactic nuclei or AGN
black holes that are growing but also
probably out flowing material in some
way either in a jet or a wind itself
inside the galaxy and so the idea that
they had was that perhaps one pressure
stripping wasn't just driving the gas
out of the galaxy and stopping star
formation it might also be funneling gas
into the black hole and feeding the
black hole and the same process and so
the big question was then well is it
actually Ram pressure stripping that's
causing the jellyfish tails
or is it that you fed the black hole in
some other way and that's causing
the jellyfish tails sort of like a
chicken in and egg situation but they
could look for other clues in the
cluster that would lead them to figure
out which one it was so when they
actually looked they found that those
galaxies with the long jellyfish tail
and with these active galactic nuclei
these active supermassive black holes
they were closer into the center of the
cluster of galaxies so if they were
randomly scattered instead it would
suggest that maybe it was just the
supermassive black hole driving winds
that caused these jellyfish tails but
because the closer in they got the more
likely they were to see these jellyfish
galaxies with a GN it suggested that
actually it was due to the fact that
they're closer than they got to the
center of the cluster but greater that
Ram pressure stripping was and so it was
probably caused by the Ram pressure
stripping but to confirm that is very
difficult what we need to do is run
simulations of this happening as well on
our computers to figure out if we put
all the laws of physics in you know this
is actually what you get out problem is
when they wrote that work in 2017 no one
had actually done a simulation where you
had both Ram pressure stripping from a
galaxy falling on the environment and
feedback from this active supermassive
black hole as well but the really
interesting thing was that the year
before this work came out so in 2016
they've been two independent groups
running different simulation codes that
are both found that when they simulated
Ram pressure stripping on a galaxy it
wasn't as effective as like a mechanism
for stripping gas as they first thought
so there was one led by American
collaborators and one led by filling him
in collaborators and they both found
that like Ram pressure stripping was
maybe shrimping about like forty to
sixty percent of the gas in a galaxy but
not all of it are you not enough to like
fully stop the galaxies from forming
stars but Bianca probably antes work
that suggested that the AGN was also
giving off these winds that could help
to further strip the galaxies might be
answer to that both the supermassive
black hole and the round pressure
stripping working together to fully get
rid of all the gas in the galaxy so that
it can't form anymore stars in the
future no one has yet simulated that
though so I'm really excited to see like
what future results from simulations
will tell us about how maybe
Ram pressure stripping along with
feedback from the supermassive black
hole can actually maybe work together to
fully strip the gas from a galaxy and
this is the part of science that I hate
the most and it's just the waiting game
part right waiting for the results to
come out so that we can chat about them
maybe we'll have to wait a year maybe
two I don't know but until then you'll
just find me staring more beautiful
pictures of jellyfish galaxies getting
hungry me so hungry me so hungry
do you mind mr. boat bike you're very
loud you can't take my hair you just
can't take it you can't tap the hair you
know if you've ever seen anything that
looks like a mermaid or a dinosaur like
send it me immediately
you